HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Judy Woodruff is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: Amid
a flurry of
meetings to fill his Cabinet,
president-elect
Donald Trump taps a vocal critic
of the ACA
to head an offensive against
Obamacare.
Then, inside Aleppo's battle --
16,000 Syrians
flee as government forces are
poised to take
back the rebel-held city.
And the impact of a Trump
presidency on Mexico's
economy -- how the future
commander in chief
plans to restructure trade with
our southern
neighbor.
VALERIA MOY, Economics
Professor: That flat-screen
that you bought that's like 60
inches' huge,
with sound surround, and it's
really nice,
and it cost you $1,000, guess
what?
You're not going to have that
anymore, because
that was made in Mexico.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN:
President-elect Trump whittled
down his options for key
administration positions
today.
John Yang has our report.
JOHN YANG: Traffic in the Trump
Tower lobby
was heavy today, as the Trump
Cabinet takes
shape.
Representative Tom Price was
picked as health
and human services secretary
tasked with fulfilling
a key campaign promise, repeal
and replace
Obamacare.
The six-term Georgia congressman
is an orthopedic
surgeon.
Chairman of the House Budget
Committee, he's
one of Obamacare's most
outspoken critics,
introducing a detailed plan to
replace it
in every Congress since 2009.
Senator Chuck Schumer, the
incoming Democratic
leader, signaled a tough
confirmation fight.
SEN.
CHARLES SCHUMER (D), New York:
He is going
to get a lot of very strong and
very thorough
questions about the kinds of
things that he
has proposed.
And if he sticks with them, I
think there
is a chance that his nomination
will fail.
JOHN YANG: Health policy expert
Seema Verma
will be in charge of Medicare
and Medicaid.
She runs a consulting firm
called SVC.
She worked closely with vice
president-elect
Pence was when he Indiana
governor designing
their Medicaid expansion, which
requires participants
to make monthly payments to get
the most coverage.
It has become a model for other
Republican
governors.
Still a big question: Who will
Mr. Trump pick
for secretary of state?
Mitt Romney now targeted by
Trump loyalists
is to have dinner with the
president-elect
Trump this evening, their second
meeting.
Senate Foreign Relations
Chairman Bob Corker,
another contender, met with him
today.
SEN.
BOB CORKER (R), Tennessee: The
secretary of
state's role is so important to
a president.
He needs to choose someone who
he's very comfortable
with, that he knows there's
going to be no
daylight between him and them.
The world needs to know that the
secretary
of state is someone who speaks
fully for the
president.
JOHN YANG: President-elect Trump
also picked
Elaine Chao for transportation
secretary.
Chao is an experienced
administrator, restoring
public trust to the United Way
after a financial
scandal, and serving as labor
secretary under
President George W. Bush, the
first Asian
American woman Cabinet member.
She's also married to Senate
Majority Leader
Mitch McConnell.
Mr. Trump hits the road again
for a campaign-style
rally in Cincinnati on Thursday,
a way for
him to meet face-to-face with
voters who propelled
him to victory.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
In the day's other news: A
chartered plane
carrying a top Brazilian soccer
team crashed
overnight in Colombia, killing
71 people on
board.
The plane went down in the
mountains near
Medellin, as the athletes and a
group of journalists
covering them were en route to a
major tournament.
Three of the team's players were
among the
six survivors.
Both of the plane's flight
recorders have
been located, and should help
determine what
caused the crash.
They were ready to play in the
biggest game
in the history of the upstart
soccer club.
This was the Brazilian soccer
club, Chapecoense,
moments before they boarded the
fated flight
to the South American Cup
tournament in Colombia;
21 journalists were also on
board to cover
the game.
The charter flight was only five
minutes from
landing when it crashed into a
mountainside.
First-responders combed through
the wreckage
in the middle of the night and
during a torrential
downpour, looking for anyone
left alive.
The few survivors, including
players, flight
crew members and one journalist,
were rushed
to the nearest hospital.
Daylight revealed the scope of
the devastation.
MAN (through translator): Today,
we will officially
begin the task of identifying
the dead, and,
unfortunately, moving the
bodies.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The cause is
under investigation,
and Colombia's aviation agency
said signs
pointed to a possible electrical
failure.
Colombian President Juan Manuel
Santos said
he was coordinating emergency
response efforts
with Brazilian leader Michel
Temer.
JUAN MANUEL SANTOS, Colombian
President (through
translator): Sadly, all we can
do, beyond
crying for those who have left
us, is to take
measures that support the
families who are
in mourning.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The relatives,
in the team's
home city of Chapeco, in
Southern Brazil,
gathered at the club's
headquarters.
This afternoon, local fans held
a vigil at
the club's stadium.
And on soccer pitches around the
world, there
were moments of silence for the
victims.
The Islamic State has now
claimed responsibility
for yesterday's attack by a
Somali-born student
at Ohio State University in
Columbus.
That comes as the Associated
Press reported
the attacker, Abdul Razak Ali
Artan, had complained
on Facebook about American
interference in
Muslim countries.
But he wasn't on the FBI's
radar.
Three of yesterday's 11 victims
remain hospitalized.
Weeks of severe drought across
the Southeast
gave way to fast-growing
wildfires in eastern
Tennessee overnight.
At least three people have died,
and more
than a dozen were hospitalized,
including
some with burns.
William Brangham has the story.
MAN: Huge fire, blowing out of
control right
now with the gusts.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The air around
the Great
Smoky Mountains was filled with
flames and
acrid smoke.
The fast-moving blazes damaged
or destroyed
hundreds of homes and other
buildings, including
an entire resort.
Tens of thousands of residents
and tourists
were forced to evacuate
Gatlinburg, Pigeon
Forge, and other parts of Sevier
County, near
the Smoky Mountains.
MAN: We were aware of the fires
in the area,
but we didn't know that they
were anywhere
close to where we were.
With the wind blowing like it
was, we needed
to leave.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Gatlinburg
Fire Chief Greg
Miller said close to 200
firefighters battled
through near-impossible
conditions.
GREG MILLER, Gatlinburg,
Tennessee, Fire Chief:
There were times last night that
we had wind
gusts in excess of 87 miles an
hour.
That is hurricane-force.
That is nowhere to be when
trying to fight
a fire.
This is a fire for the history
books, because
it is unlike anything most have
ever seen.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The Tennessee
National Guard
was also deployed, but Miller
said the worst
is -- quote -- "definitely
over."
The fires also closed Dollywood,
country music
star Dolly Parton's theme park.
And in Gatlinburg, the Ripley's
Aquarium of
the Smokies remained untouched
and its more
than 10,000 animals were safe.
Wind speeds dropped to about 15
miles per
hour today, and rain is in the
forecast for
some of the hardest-hit areas.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham.
HARI SREENIVASAN: South Korea's
embattled
President Park Geun-hye offered
a conditional
resignation today, in a bid to
stave off impeachment.
Park has been embroiled in a
corruption scandal
in which she has been accused of
providing
special favors to a childhood
friend.
That touched off massive
demonstrations demanding
her ouster.
In a national address today in
Seoul, Park
said she's ready to step down if
Parliament
arranges the technical details.
PARK GEUN-HYE, South Korea
President (through
translator): I will leave
everything, including
the shortening of my
presidential term, to
the Parliament's decision.
I will resign, along with a
schedule and procedure
that is decided by political
parties that
can minimize any confusion
arising from the
unexpected transfer of power.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Opposition
parties immediately
called the offer a stall tactic
to avoid impeachment
before her term ends in early
2018.
South Korea's National Assembly
could vote
on a motion to impeach her as
early as Friday.
Back in the U.S., thousands of
low-wage workers
staged protests and sit-ins
today in hundreds
of cities, demanding a $15
minimum wage.
They included employees of fast
food restaurants,
Uber drivers, child care
providers, and airport
workers.
At Chicago's O'Hare, hundreds of
protesters
gathered outside terminals,
chanting and waving
signs.
At a press conference later,
striking employees
voiced their frustrations.
KISHA RIVERA, Airport Employee:
We are not
asking for special treatment.
We are asking for decent
treatment.
We are asking for decent wages.
We're asking -- no, we're not
asking.
We're demanding respect.
WOMAN: That's right!
WOMAN: Yes!
HARI SREENIVASAN: Meanwhile, in
Los Angeles,
police arrested several
protesters picketing
a McDonald's for blocking
traffic.
All told, dozens of people were
arrested across
the country.
And stocks rose on Wall Street
today, led
by a rally in the health care
sector.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained more
than 23 points to close at
19121.
The Nasdaq rose 11 points, and
the S&P 500
added nearly three.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
what Donald
Trump's pick for health and
human services
secretary means for Obamacare;
Syrian government
forces gain ground in Aleppo;
expanding charter
schools into black communities;
and much more.
As president-elect Trump's pick
to lead the
Health and Human Services
Department, Congressman
Tom Price would oversee programs
as wide-ranging
as Medicare and Medicaid.
But, first, he would help lead
efforts to
carry out one of Mr. Trump's
signature campaign
pledges: repeal and replace the
Affordable
Care Act, also known as
Obamacare.
For more, we turn to Sarah
Kliff.
She has written extensively on
the topic for
the Web site Vox.
What do we know about
Congressman Price and
the plans that he has already
had in mind?
SARAH KLIFF, Vox: So, he's a
congressman who
has spent a lot of time thinking
about repeal
and replace of Obamacare.
He's the author of a 242-page
replacement
plan for Obamacare.
He's the guy you would pick if
you're quite
serious about moving forward on
Obamacare
repeal.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Republicans
have tried to
do repeal and replace before.
Even Speaker Ryan has a plan.
What do these plans have in
common?
SARAH KLIFF: So, they generally
cover fewer
people than Obamacare.
They would leave a few million
people uninsured.
The exact number depends on the
plan.
They're generally better for
young, healthy
people and worse for sick, older
people.
HARI SREENIVASAN: How so?
SARAH KLIFF: They have a lot
less protections
for people with preexisting
conditions.
They make it possible for
insurance companies
to charge more to those who are
sick.
That would be a really big
change from Obamacare,
which outlaws those provisions.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And then what
does the pick
say of Seema Verma, who is going
to run Medicare
and Medicaid, say about this new
team that
he's putting in place?
She's worked on Medicaid
expansion as a consultant
for different states?
SARAH KLIFF: She's incredibly
experienced
in Medicaid policy.
It suggests to me that the Trump
administration
is thinking about making some
big changes
to Medicaid, possibly adding
premiums into
the program, which serves
low-income Americans.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And is there
-- when we
talk about the changes that
could affect millions
of people -- we know Obamacare
gets this big
umbrella thing, but really on
brass tacks
when it comes to specific
policies that impact
folks, so let's, for example,
take contraception
coverage.
How could that change?
SARAH KLIFF: That's something
that's very
easy for a Trump administration,
for Congressman
Price in office to really turn
back on day
one.
It's something that the Obama
administration
did in regulations.
It's not in the law.
They could rewrite those
regulations to say
that contraceptives are no
longer covered
under Obamacare.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And the
congressman is against
abortion, Congressman Price is,
right?
But it takes something else to
try to get
even your personal view put into
legislation
that gets passed by all of
Congress.
SARAH KLIFF: Sure.
There is going to be a lot of
back-and-forth,
a lot of heated battles just
like we had around
Obamacare in 2010.
There will be a lot of
infighting and figuring
out what does the Republican
agenda on health
care look like?
What is one that Trump and
senators and Representative
Price at HHS now, what can they
agree on?
HARI SREENIVASAN: What about
Medicare?
That affects a huge population
also covered
under this.
SARAH KLIFF: The Republicans
have a pretty
cohesive view for Medicare.
They want to switch it to more
of a voucher
program, where seniors get a set
amount of
money, they shop for different
plans.
One of those plans might be a
government-run
Medicaid.
There would also be private
competitors and
they would kind of be using
their set amount
of money to pick whatever plan
they could
afford.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And how about
the health
-- I guess the health insurance
that most
of us get through employer
coverage?
SARAH KLIFF: There is a big
change to that
in Representative Price's plan
as well.
He would cap the tax exclusion
we right now
for insurance, meaning that the
cost of insurance
that you get at work, that could
go up pretty
significantly under
Representative Price's
plan.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And so all of
these of course
have political consequences.
When you feel it in your
personal pocketbook,
you might choose to vote a
different way.
SARAH KLIFF: Yes.
I think there will be things
that Republican
legislators like, that they like
in policy
and in theory, that are quite
politically
difficult to implement.
The cap on employer-sponsored
insurance is
a great example of that.
Democrats wanted to make the
same change in
2010, but they found it was
politically impossible
to do so.
I think Republicans will face
similar barriers.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Sarah Kliff from
Vox, thanks so much.
SARAH KLIFF: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
let's dig a little
deeper now on the potential
fallout for Obamacare
and the people who use its
benefits.
Sabrina Corlette specializes in
health insurance
markets, as a research professor
at Georgetown
University.
And Bob Moffit is a senior
fellow at the Heritage
Foundation's center for Health
Policy Studies.
The Trump team has been meeting
with people
at Heritage Foundation during
this transition.
So, Bob Moffit, what does this
appointment
signal to you?
ROBERT MOFFIT, Heritage
Foundation: It signals
that president-elect Trump is
very serious
about the promise to repeal and
replace Obamacare.
The appointment of Congressman
Price is the
appointment of an individual who
has a long
experience in health policy in
the House and
has introduced legislation to
repeal Obamacare
and to replace it with
provisions of his own.
So I think from the standpoint
of the administration,
this is a very serious
appointment.
It's a very, very big signal to
both the House
and the Senate that the Trump
administration
is very serious about this
issue.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Sabrina
Corlette, he has
had a 240-plus page plan already
on the books.
That's in addition to all the
other Republican
plans that are out there to
repeal and replace.
SABRINA CORLETTE, Center on
Health Insurance
Reforms, Georgetown University:
Right.
I think one thing that Mr.
Moffit and I would
absolutely agree on is that the
nomination
of Mr. Price is a clear signal
that the repeal
of Obamacare is a top priority
for this new
president.
However, I don't think that we
can say anything
that the Republicans have put
forward, including
Mr. Price, constitutes a
replacement of the
Affordable Care Act, because
none of the proposals,
including Mr. Price's proposal,
would cover
nearly the same number of people
that the
Affordable Care Act covers, nor
would it provide
the same consumer protections
for people with
preexisting conditions.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, Robert
Moffit, again,
a plan does not exist.
We're talking about based on
what he's proposed
before and what other
Republicans have proposed
before.
ROBERT MOFFIT: Right.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What's the
cost that maybe
the new administration is
willing to tolerate
in the number of people that
got...
ROBERT MOFFIT: Well, I think
that the president-elect
himself made a comment at the
very beginning
of this, and actually put it in
print, that,
in fact, nobody should fall
through the cracks.
Remember that Tom Price is an
orthopedic surgeon,
so I think what we're looking at
is a surgical
approach to the Affordable Care
Act.
I don't think what you will see
is any kind
of massive disruption.
I think the major concern right
now for those
of us in health policy is that
we are already
facing a massive instability in
the insurance
markets, particularly in the
small group and
the individual markets.
With premiums jumping 25 percent
nationwide,
average premiums in the
exchanges, and then
with these breathtaking
deductibles -- for
a family with a bronze plan,
you're talking
about a $12,000 deductible --
health insurance
is becoming less and less
affordable for millions
of Americans.
The people in the exchanges is
only one part
of this problem -- or only one
part of this
problem.
But you got about 10 million
people in the
individual market outside of the
exchanges
who do not get any subsidies at
all who are
being affected by this, and then
you also
have another 15 million people
in the group
market, so -- small group
market.
So this problem that we have
right now with
affordability and cost and the
instability
of the insurance market is
affecting millions
of people.
What that means is, is that the
administration
cannot waste time on this.
They have to come to the rescue
of people
to make sure that those who have
coverage
don't actually lose it, and we
have higher
rates of uninsurance as a result
of it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Sabrina
Corlette, how do
you take a surgical approach,
but also contain
costs?
SABRINA CORLETTE: Well, I'm not
sure how you
take a surgical approach, based
on what we
have heard Mr. Price and other
congressional
leaders, as well as the
president-elect, say.
They have called for a wholesale
repeal of
the Affordable Care Act.
That would include expansion of
Medicaid,
which is the program that covers
low-income
people.
That would include a repeal of
the tax credits
that help moderate-income people
afford coverage,
as well as the individual
mandate, which is
supposed to get healthy people
into the pool
and make coverage more
affordable across the
board.
Once you repeal all of that,
that's going
to cause massive disruption in
the market.
So, that's going to throw as
many as 22 million
people off of coverage.
Now, Mr. Price has put forward a
bill.
However, the tax credits that it
provides
are a tiny fraction of what the
Affordable
Care Act provides to people.
They're also not income-based,
so they heavily
favor higher-income people over
lower-income
people.
And then if you have a
preexisting condition
and you have even a tiny lapse
in coverage,
you're left out in the cold.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mr. Moffit,
this is also
on the heels of president-elect
Trump coming
out and saying, listen, he'd
like to preserve
the clause that says you can't
discriminate
on preexisting conditions.
That's almost universally
agreed.
There is nobody that wants that.
ROBERT MOFFIT: There is nobody
who is arguing
that we should exclude
individuals from health
insurance coverage because they
are sick or
they have a preexisting
condition.
That's nonsense.
That's never been the debate.
The question is, what is the
best way to do
it?
HARI SREENIVASAN: And how do you
pay for that?
ROBERT MOFFIT: Well, you're
going to have
to pay for it in any event,
because we're
paying for it one way or
another.
If people do not get access to
health insurance
and they end up in the hospital
emergency
room, the most expensive place
on the planet,
tax players are stuck with the
bill.
So, we have got to address this.
Frankly, I think that a
mainstream proposal
right now that is circulating
among House
Republicans is to adopt one of
the practices
that we have in group insurance
right now
under the Health Insurance
Affordability and
Accountability Act, which is
this, is that
if you have credible coverage,
creditable
coverage, and you move from one
job to another
and join different types of
groups, you cannot
be rated up, regardless of any
kind of preexisting
condition.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes.
ROBERT MOFFIT: We do not have
any kind of
crisis of preexisting conditions
in employment-based
health insurance.
The problem is in the individual
market.
If you're going to be personally
responsible
and buy insurance at an
affordable rate, you
can do that.
Otherwise, you can be rated up.
That puts the responsibility
where it belongs,
on the individual who is buying
the insurance.
SABRINA CORLETTE: Well, for
people who have
come off an employer-based plan,
that typically
means they have come off because
they have
lost their job.
It can be very difficult for
those people
to afford the premiums that you
have to pay
to maintain health insurance
coverage, particularly
given the fact that the tax
credits that some
of these Republican proposals
are talking
about are paltry.
So what would happen is, if you
skip some
time and go without coverage
because you can't
afford it, you can't afford the
premium, what
some of these proposals would do
would effectively
lock you out until you either
get back into
an employer-based plan or become
eligible
for Medicare.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
this is a conversation,
and legislation will eventually
make its way
to Capitol Hill.
We will have you back then.
Robert Moffit, Sabrina Corlette,
thank you
both.
ROBERT MOFFIT: Pleasure.
SABRINA CORLETTE: Thank you.
It was a pleasure.
ROBERT MOFFIT: All right.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Overseas now:
Thousands
more civilians fled the eastern
rebel-held
sectors of Syria's largest city,
Aleppo, this
week, as the war there took an
even more violent
turn.
The Syrian Civil Defense Rescue
Group reported
that at least 50 people were
killed today
and 150 injured, amid relentless
shelling
and bombing.
Chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret
Warner reports.
MARGARET WARNER: In the last few
days, Syrian
government forces have retaken a
large swathe
of Eastern Aleppo, long a
stronghold for fighters
opposed to President Bashar
al-Assad.
Aid groups say shortages of food
and medical
care there are the gravest yet.
QUESTION (through translator):
How did your
mother die?
WOMAN (through translator): She
died of hunger.
We haven't had any water or food
for five
months.
They didn't feed us.
They ate bread, and we were
hungry.
MARGARET WARNER: As the death
toll keeps mounting,
the top U.N. envoy to Syria
suggested today
the rebels may not be able to
hold out.
STAFFAN DE MISTURA, Special
United Nations
Envoy for Syria: This is a
military acceleration,
and I can't tell you how long
Eastern Aleppo
will last.
MARGARET WARNER: Major aid
groups are still
being denied entry to help
civilians remaining
the city.
BETTINA LUESCHER, World Food
Program: We are
ready to mobilize food,
preposition in warehouses
in Western Aleppo, or across the
border from
Turkey, to the people trapped in
Eastern Aleppo,
if access is granted.
So, once again, we join -- like
everybody
else, let us get into Eastern
Aleppo.
We can help the people there.
Let us in.
MARGARET WARNER: There is not a
single working
hospital left in East Aleppo
either.
MAN: Medical structures that we
have been
supporting for many years that
have been bombed
now almost a dozen times over
the last year.
It's just incredible.
MARGARET WARNER: And Russian and
Syrian planes
reportedly have dropped leaflets
on East Aleppo,
warning: "If you do not leave
these areas
urgently, you will be
annihilated.
You know that everyone has given
up on you.
They left you alone to face your
doom."
RANIA ABOUZEID, Journalist: You
know, the
Syrian rebels have always felt
abandoned.
MARGARET WARNER: Journalist
Rania Abouzeid
in Beirut keeps in contact with
Western-backed
rebel commanders.
RANIA ABOUZEID: They felt
abandoned by an
international community that
said Assad must
go, but didn't really help them
to see that
through.
So there's a great sense of
abandonment, there
is a sense of anger.
MARGARET WARNER: The battlefield
tilted sharply
in Assad's favor when Russia
entered the war
14 months ago.
With Russian airpower, and
Shiite militias
from Iran, Lebanon and Iraq on
the ground,
the Assad regime has regained
its footing
and territory.
RANIA ABOUZEID: We have seen
several instances
in the recent past, over the
past year, when
it looked like Aleppo might
fall, but certainly
nothing in terms of the scale
and the speed
at which we have seen regime
gains in the
eastern part of the city over
the past 24
to 48 hours.
So it certainly looks like this
might be the
decisive moment for the future
of rebel-held
Aleppo at this point.
MARGARET WARNER: Secretary of
State John Kerry
keeps pushing for a cease-fire
for Aleppo,
negotiating with Russia and
regional powers
backing different rebel
factions.
RANIA ABOUZEID: The Syrians have
some hope
that if the bigger guys, the
bigger players
can find some sort of agreement.
Then perhaps that might trickle
down to mean
something in terms of the
battlefield on the
ground.
MARGARET WARNER: But other top
Obama officials
suspect Russia wants to cement a
military
victory on the ground now, in
the administration's
final weeks.
Said one: "If you're sitting in
Moscow, would
you rather deal with President
Obama, or present
a fait accompli to new President
Trump?"
For now, it looks like the
rebels want to
fight on in Aleppo.
RANIA ABOUZEID: Well, certainly
the rebels
will try and win it back.
But the question is, will they
have the means
to do that?
Will they have the international
support to
do that?
And will this change anything in
terms of
the calculus of their
international backers?
MARGARET WARNER: Questions that
will have
to be faced by Syria, its
neighbors and the
new American president alike.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Margaret Warner
in Washington.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
economic ties
between the U.S. and Mexico
under a President
Trump; and athletes who are
having an impact
off the field.
But first: the battle over
school choice and
public education is likely to
intensify under
the Trump administration.
His choice for education
secretary, Betsy
DeVos, is a big supporter of
vouchers and
charter schools, both of which
use tax dollars
that would normally go to
neighborhood public
schools.
The fight over these issues is
already building
within the African-American
community.
The NAACP is calling for a
moratorium on new
charter schools, but some black
parents are
pushing back against that.
Special correspondent Lisa Stark
of our partner
Education Week reports from
Memphis, part
of our weekly series Making the
Grade.
LISA STARK: At Freedom
Preparatory Academy
in Memphis, there's a constant
beat echoing
through the hallways.
And it's not just from the
African drum class
required of every middle
schooler here.
What's being drummed into these
charter school
students is that education, a
college degree
and proper behavior are critical
to getting
ahead.
If I ask you to describe Freedom
Prep in one
word, what would it be?
TYLER VAUGHN, Student: College.
BRIANNA TODD, Student:
Preparation.
TALY ORDONEZ, Student: Life.
LISA STARK: Senior Tyler Vaughn,
eighth grader
Brianna Todd and fifth grader
Taly Ordonez
all came to Freedom Prep after
stints in traditional
public schools.
TYLER VAUGHN: Since sixth grade,
they always
instilled in us that we would be
going to
college and we would excel in
college.
BRIANNA TODD: It definitely
teaches us to
be responsible throughout out
entire life.
TALY ORDONEZ: Charter school, it
prepares
you for college and life.
LISA STARK: Nearly three million
students
in the U.S. attend charter
schools in 42 states
and the District of Columbia,
about 6 percent
of all public school students
nationwide.
But in more than a dozen cities,
at least
30 percent of the students
attend charters.
As in many cities,
African-American parents
in Memphis are voting with their
feet.
This was a struggling elementary
school three
years ago, when the state asked
Freedom Prep
to take it over.
The charter school came in.
Enrollment doubled.
Charter schools are often open
in poor neighborhoods,
and predominantly serve children
of color.
And they have a mixed record.
Some are excellent.
Others fall far short.
Some states have strict
standards for charters.
Others do not.
CORNELL WILLIAM BROOKS,
President, NAACP:
The issue for us is just simply
making sure
everyone operates by the same
rules.
LISA STARK: The NAACP is calling
for a moratorium
on new charter schools,
concerned about a
host of issues, including
charters that seem
to cherry-pick students or have
high suspension
rates for children of color.
The group wants reforms.
CORNELL WILLIAM BROOKS: Make
sure kids aren't
being suspended or expelled
unfairly.
Make sure you have standards of
accountability
and transparency, and let's make
sure that
we don't cream the best
students, to the disservice
of all the students.
LISA STARK: NAACP President
Cornell William
Brooks insists the group is not
anti-charter,
but he stresses accountability
for these schools,
which receive public education
dollars, but
are often run by private
organizations and
boards.
CORNELL WILLIAM BROOKS: If we
think that setting
up a system without standards,
like an educational
Wild, Wild West, is going to
save public education
-- by public education, I mean
education for
all children -- we are sadly
mistaken.
LISA STARK: Do you think there's
a schism,
a break in the black community
over this?
SARAH CARPENTER, Memphis Lift: I
know it is.
LISA STARK: Sarah Carpenter
believes in charter
schools and worries that the
NAACP is out
of touch.
SARAH CARPENTER: Most of these
people live
in suburban areas.
They look like me, but they are
not connected
to me.
LISA STARK: Carpenter lives in
North Memphis,
an area of high poverty, with
both traditional
and charter schools.
She sent her oldest
granddaughter to a charter
more than a decade ago, inspired
by the school's
focus on college.
SARAH CARPENTER: It changed my
life, because
they made our kids believe that
they could
do this.
And growing up in this
neighborhood, my mom
didn't talk about college.
LISA STARK: Carpenter's
granddaughter did
go on to college, and Carpenter
now runs Memphis
lift, an education advocacy
group for parents
funded partly by groups that
support charters.
She led a noisy protest at the
NAACP board
meeting in Cincinnati this fall,
as the board
ratified the charter moratorium
resolution.
SARAH CARPENTER: We were
screaming to the
top of our voice: You're not
speaking for
us.
KEITH WILLIAMS, Memphis Teachers
Union: I
don't think they have the full
understanding
and exposure of what a proper,
adequate education
is for their children.
LISA STARK: Keith Williams is
the executive
director of Tennessee's largest
local teachers
union, and he believes parents
are often hoodwinked
by charters.
But it sounds to me like you're
saying parents
shouldn't have a choice, aren't
smart enough
to know where their kid should
go to school.
KEITH WILLIAMS: I'm saying that
some parents
are not capable of determining
venues that
will be the most advantageous
for their children.
And that's a fact.
LISA STARK: Teachers unions have
long opposed
charters, which in most cases
can hire and
fire teachers at will, and
Williams believes
charters have harmed public
education as a
whole.
KEITH WILLIAMS: If we didn't
have the competitive,
economic interests of these
self-serving entrepreneurs
in charters, public schools
would be in a
better condition, they would be
more academically
sound, certainly more
financially sound.
LISA STARK: But for parents such
as Kimberly
McNeal, there is no debate.
She even moved just so she could
easily get
her daughters, Cassidy (ph) and
Kai (ph),
to a nearby charter school,
Vision Prep.
KIMBERLY MCNEAL, Parent: Me
coming from a
Memphis city school, I wanted
something different,
something more challenging for
my children.
LISA STARK: It's important for
you to have
a choice?
KIMBERLY MCNEAL: It is.
It's important for anybody to
have a choice,
whether it's public, private or
charter.
Everybody should have a choice
in where they
feel like their children would
do better and
succeed at.
LISA STARK: At Vision Prep,
which is well-regarded,
you will find the hallmark of
many charters:
Students are called scholars,
and college
is emphasized, from pennants to
classroom
cheers.
And like many charters, this is
a no-excuses
school, stressing high standards
in academics
and behavior, practices that
don't always
sit well with charter opponents,
but appeal
to many parents.
KIMBERLY MCNEAL: I think it's
good because
it's teaching children focus.
It's teaching them to be on one
accord at
school.
They're trying to be uniform.
They're trying to be more
organized and put
together, which is a good thing,
because it
not only teaches them here; it
teaches them
how to be like that at home.
LISA STARK: The battle over
charters is only
likely to heat up.
President-elect Trump is a big
supporter of
school choice.
But many argue this is the wrong
debate, that
what's critical is finding
schools that work,
no matter how they're set up.
SARAH CARPENTER: I feel so sad,
because we
shouldn't have to fight for our
kids to get
a quality education.
Why do we have to keep fighting
as a race
of people, black people?
And what's wrong with us wanting
what's best
for our kids?
Just because we are black and
poor do not
mean that we don't want what's
best for our
kids.
LISA STARK: So, when
African-American parents
and students find what they hope
is the best
school, it's no wonder they're
celebrating.
In Memphis, I'm Lisa Stark of
Education Week
for the "PBS NewsHour."
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now to
president-elect Trump's
focus on Mexico, and how Mexico
is responding
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now to
president-elect Trump's
focus on Mexico, and how Mexico
is responding
to his victory.
Last week, we examined Trump's
promises to
build a wall and deport
undocumented immigrants.
Tonight, in part two of our
series, his economic
pledges and threats to derail
trade deals
and interrupt billions of
dollars of remittances
sent from the U.S. to Mexico.
Special correspondent Nick
Schifrin and producer
Zach Fannin, again with the help
of the Pulitzer
Center on Crisis Reporting,
begin our story
well north of the border, in
Columbus, Ohio.
NICK SCHIFRIN: What would you
have described
this community as when you were
growing up?
JEFF FERRELLI, Restaurant Owner:
Blue-collar,
hardworking, good schools, just
good, honest
people.
NICK SCHIFRIN: For 49 years,
Jeff Ferrelli,
his sister and their father have
run an Italian
restaurant at the center of a
neighborhood
where everybody knows your name.
JEFF FERRELLI: Same people
sitting in the
same booths at the same time
every day, and
sort of like that Cheers kind of
atmosphere,
you know?
NICK SCHIFRIN: Just down the
block was the
neighborhood's heart and soul.
This huge space used to be the
Delphi auto
plant, the area's largest
employer.
Ferrelli worked there for 15
years.
JEFF FERRELLI: It was hot.
It smelled.
But everybody in there worked
hard, and were
proud of what they were doing.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But, by the early
'90s, the
economy started declining.
By 2007, the plant closed.
They ripped it down to build a
casino, and
the community never regained its
prosperity
or pride.
Today, the Macy's is still
barren, other than
the graffiti.
The nearby movie theater has
gone dark.
Once-thriving businesses can't
find new owners.
DONALD TRUMP (R),
President-Elect: We're living
through the greatest jobs theft
in the history
of the world.
Delphi laid off 5,805.
What's with Delphi?
The Trump administration will
stop the jobs
from leaving Ohio and from
leaving America.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The message
during the campaign
that Trump put out while in
Ohio, did that
appeal to you?
JEFF FERRELLI: The incentives
are to put your
businesses overseas.
Hopefully, some groundwork will
be put in
place to correct that.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Ferrelli knows
that there are
many reasons for the closed
plant, but his
nostalgia allows for an easy
target: the neighborhood's
growing number of Hispanic and
Somali immigrants.
JEFF FERRELLI: The influx of new
people doesn't
match the ones that have left.
And I guess that's kind of the
big thing.
NICK SCHIFRIN: President-elect
Donald Trump
links those immigrants with jobs
lost to some
of the same countries.
DONALD TRUMP: They get the jobs,
the plants,
the money.
We get the drugs.
We get the unemployment.
It's a one-way street.
Not going to happen anymore,
folks.
Not going to happen anymore.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Twenty-three
hundred miles
south, in the Mexican city of
Juarez, the
Delphi plant occupies pride of
place.
This 24-year-old works on the
factory floor.
Delphi declined an interview
request, so he
felt he had to stay anonymous.
He invited us for breakfast
burritos.
How important are the Delphi
plants to you
and this community?
MAN (through translator): It's
my means of
work, my means of sustaining my
family, and
it's the means of sustaining the
community.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Early every
morning, he and
hundreds of people file out via
bus after
Delphi's overnight shift.
Delphi is Mexico's largest
private employer,
and has helped lift up the
working and middle
classes here.
It's provided the collective
pride that Western
Columbus lost, even if his
starting salary
was only $12 a day.
How have American companies that
have come
in here like Delphi helped
changed the city?
MAN (through translator): It's
much more stable
economically.
We have better houses, better
cars.
Even the school system has
improved.
NICK SCHIFRIN: On the campaign,
Trump argued
Delphi's gains in moving to
Mexico came at
the expense of American losses,
because of
the North American Free Trade
Agreement, or
NAFTA, the 1994 trade deal
between the U.S.,
Canada and Mexico.
According to the nonpartisan
Congressional
Research Service, NAFTA's
benefits have been
spread out, and not widely felt.
But its costs have been
concentrated and helped
accelerate U.S. manufacturing
losses.
In order to protect that
manufacturing, Trump
has promised to pull out of
NAFTA, or impose
heavy tariffs on Mexican goods.
DONALD TRUMP: This wave of
globalization has
wiped out totally, totally our
middle class.
It doesn't have to be this way.
We can turn it around, and we
can turn it
around fast.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Juarez Mayor
Armando Cabada
can't even imagine Trump
enacting all his
campaign pledges.
What impact would changing NAFTA
have on the
people of Juarez and the city of
Juarez?
ARMANDO CABADA, Mayor of Juarez,
Mexico: We
are the principal makers of TVs
in the world,
one of the principal providers
for the car
industry in the world.
How can he halt this?
Only a crazy man would do that.
NICK SCHIFRIN: From his roof,
Juarez is only
a few feet from El Paso, Texas.
The two economies are just as
interdependent.
The U.S. buys nearly 80 percent
of Mexican
exports.
And Mexico is the U.S.' second
largest trading
partner.
ARMANDO CABADA (through
translator): He's
going against the current.
It's a misunderstanding of the
world we live
in now, the globalized world in
which we are
all immersed.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Since NAFTA, in
cities like
Juarez, American companies line
the streets.
The stores and supply chains are
completely
integrated across the border.
Mexican workers now manufacture
parts that
American workers need.
Two weeks ago, Delphi's CFO said
if Trump
closes the border -- quote --
"In less than
a week, all the people who voted
for him in
Michigan and Ohio would be out
of work."
Economics professor Valeria Moy
agrees.
VALERIA MOY, Economics
Professor: You are
going to disrupt all the supply
chains.
And that's going to be huge, not
only for
Mexico.
Of course, for Mexico, it's
going to be huge.
But for the States, it's going
to be huge.
NICK SCHIFRIN: She points out
NAFTA hasn't
only helped Mexico.
Those American companies in
Mexico are profitable.
NAFTA helps employ six million
or more Americans
and provides Americans with
cheap products.
VALERIA MOY: That flat-screen
that you bought
that's like 60 inches' huge,
with sound surround,
and it's really nice, and it
cost you $1,000,
guess what?
You're not going to have that
anymore, because
that was made in Mexico.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And that means
Mexico's economy
is now much more dependent on
its ability
to send products north.
VALERIA MOY: Many parts of the
country will
be very, very significantly
damaged if Donald
Trump enacts any measure of
protectionism.
DONALD TRUMP: And every time I
see a Delphi,
and every time I see these
companies leaving,
that wall gets a little bit
higher and it
keeps going up.
NICK SCHIFRIN: To try and force
Mexico to
pay for the promised southern
border wall,
Trump has threatened a second
blow to the
Mexican economy and to people
like Marta Garcia.
She runs a Mexico City food
truck and makes
a few dollars a day.
Last year, her oldest daughter
fled to the
U.S. and sends money home.
Every year, Mexicans send $25
billion of remittances.
Trump is promising to halt or
tax that money.
What would happen if your
daughter couldn't
send any money, or could only
send only a
fraction of the money that she
has been sending
recently?
MARTA GARCIA, Mexico (through
translator):
I would have to tell my other
children that
I am very sorry, but I would
take them out
of school so they could work.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Every few days,
the family
walks together to pick up the
daughter's money
at the local Western Union.
Marta hopes the money keeps
flowing, so her
children receive the education
she never did.
MARTA GARCIA (through
translator): You have
to have education, an education,
so that they
can pay you a little more.
If you don't have an education,
they will
not pay you enough, and that's
why many people
leave to the U.S.
NICK SCHIFRIN: That's a warning
that many
here make.
Cutting remittances, curtailing
trade, and
imposing tariffs could
exacerbate the very
problems that Trump is vowing to
stop.
VALERIA MOY: It will enhance the
idea of illegal
immigration, because the
situation in Mexico
is going to be worse.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Enrique Krauze is
one of the
country's most prominent
historians, and goes
even further.
ENRIQUE KRAUZE, Historian:
NAFTA, immigration,
deportations, the wall, yes,
those are very
important issues socially and
economically,
but, first of all, dignity and
respect.
We need an apology.
NICK SCHIFRIN: He says Mexicans
overwhelmingly
oppose Trump, not only because
of his policies,
but because of the most negative
rhetoric
by any U.S. president since the
late 1920s,
when president Calvin Coolidge
considered
Mexico a communist enemy.
ENRIQUE KRAUZE: Those wounds are
now part
of the remote history, truly
remote.
Now those wounds, incredibly,
would be opened.
NICK SCHIFRIN: We saw signs of
those festering
wounds on an otherwise normal
Tuesday at a
quintessentially Mexican store.
Trump has sparked a pinata
renaissance.
We thought Mexicans would, well,
bash Trump,
but they were measured and
deeply fearful.
MAN (through translator): I
don't like that
he was elected, because the
situation is already
hard and will become harder next
year.
MAN (through translator): It's
not fair.
Donald Trump talked about many
things that
offended us Mexicans.
The truth is, I don't like he
came into power.
NICK SCHIFRIN: For many
Mexicans, Trump's
victory is a nightmare.
For some Americans in the
struggling Midwest,
it's an opportunity.
The relationship hasn't been
this fraught
in nearly a century.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Nick
Schifrin
in Mexico City.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We will be
back in a moment
with a look at how college
athletic teams
are helping kids with
life-threatening illnesses.
But, first, take a moment to
hear from your
local PBS station.
It's a chance to offer your
support, which
helps keep programs like ours on
the air.
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now to a
"NewsHour" Shares:
something that caught our eye
that we thought
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now to a
"NewsHour" Shares:
something that caught our eye
that we thought
you might find interesting as
well.
A program called Team IMPACT is
trying to
bring normalcy to what can be a
stressful
situation for parents and
children fighting
sometimes life-threatening
diseases.
The organization has matched
more than 1,000
children with college athletes
across the
country.
From PBS station WGBH in Boston,
Tina Martin
introduces us to one little girl
who is feeling
the team spirit.
TINA MARTIN: This is 7-year-old
Ava Girolimetti.
She loves to cook and eat.
AVA GIROLIMETTI, 7 Years Old:
Cheese is one
of my favorite foods.
TINA MARTIN: She has a
collection of fancy
hats with flowers.
AVA GIROLIMETTI: Let's see.
One, two, three, four, five,
six, seven, I
think?
TINA MARTIN: And she loves
soccer.
AVA GIROLIMETTI: We play all
positions.
TINA MARTIN: Outwardly, Ava's a
pretty normal
little girl, but she was
diagnosed with leukemia
last spring.
ALLISON GIROLIMETTI, Mother of
Ava Girolimetti:
Everything moved so quickly from
when she
was diagnosed.
We went to the hospital on
Saturday, and didn't
come home for six weeks.
TINA MARTIN: Doctors started
chemotherapy
immediately, and Ava was
sidelined her from
her favorite sport.
MARC GIROLIMETTI, Father of Ava
Girolimetti:
At home, we have scheduled
medications that
she has to take on a near daily
basis.
TINA MARTIN: Ava may have been
too sick to
play soccer, but that doesn't
mean she can't
be part of a team.
Both she and her sister Sophia
are part of
the Babson College Women's
soccer team through
a program called Team IMPACT.
ALLISON GIROLIMETTI: For her,
its been a great
experience, because she plays
soccer herself
ALLISON GIROLIMETTI: For her,
its been a great
experience, because she plays
soccer herself
and she's not able to play this
season.
TINA MARTIN: Based in
Massachusetts, Team
IMPACT matches college sports
teams with critically
or chronically ill children all
over the country.
ERIKA LOOMER, Team IMPACT: We
are currently
in 45 states, 427 campuses,
30,000 student
athletes.
TINA MARTIN: Here in
Massachusetts, Team IMPACT
currently has 118 children like
Ava matched
with all kinds of college teams.
ERIKA LOOMER: You don't see that
battle on
her face, when she's around
these student
athletes.
TINA MARTIN: Babson junior
Colleen Beggan
understands Ava's battle better
than most.
COLLEEN BEGGAN, College Student:
My sister
was also a soccer player and she
had cancer
in her ribs.
TINA MARTIN: Being at Babson
takes on a special
meaning for Marc and Allison.
It's where they went to college
and fell in
love.
And now they see their daughter
finding a
safe haven from her disease.
MARC GIROLIMETTI: It means
everything to see
your child sort of in a much
more natural
environment, with the
understanding that,
without her having cancer, we
probably wouldn't
be having this experience.
TINA MARTIN: Being part of the
team allows
Ava to be a fun, curious, and
outgoing 7-year-old.
Her big sister, Sophia, says she
is pretty
good on the soccer field, too.
SOPHIA GIROLIMETTI, Sister of
Ava Girolimetti:
She's very, very good.
She's awesome.
TINA MARTIN: Her family says she
has a long
way to go with treatment, but
believe the
TINA MARTIN: Her family says she
has a long
way to go with treatment, but
believe the
future is bright.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Tina
Martin in
Wellesley, Massachusetts.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Online
tonight, our Ask
the Headhunter column has tips
for how to
overcome age discrimination
during job interviews.
Plus, learn about an innovative
buoy floating
just outside the Port of New
York that could
help save the lives of some of
the rarest
whales in the world.
help save the lives of some of
the rarest
whales in the world.
And, finally, on our Facebook
page, watch
a video of the Great Barrier
Reef, where scientists
And, finally, on our Facebook
page, watch
a video of the Great Barrier
Reef, where scientists
say warming seas this year have
caused the
worst coral die-off on record.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
Tomorrow, an on-the-ground
report from our
correspondent in Cuba.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.